Propose an API change for verifying quotes with collateral baselines (#4367)
openenclave/openenclave: docs/DesignDocs/AttestationQPLEnforcementSupport.md

Attestation SGX QPL Enforcement Support
====

> This proposal is to make a change to `oe_verify_evidence`, so that it can support policy-based SGX QPL (Quote Provider Library) specific enhancement, such as allowing the OE SDK applications to pass third party cloud specific parameters to the SGX QPL for more advanced quote verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal is to make a change to `oe_verify_evidence`, so that it can support policy-based SGX QPL (Quote Provider Library) specific enhancement, such as allowing Verifier applications to pass third party cloud specific parameters to the SGX QPL to allow them to do more advanced quote verification.
```

Motivation
----

Intel SGX rolls out PCK certificate and collateral information about every six months.
There is a scenario where a quote signed by the last version of PCK certificate cannot be verified with the latest version of collateral information.
This causes unnecessary attestation failures when new versions of PCK certificate and collateral information are rolled out.
To deal with this issue, the SGX QPL needs to return any version of collateral information based on additional query parameters (referred to as "baselines").
With that, a new API called `sgx_ql_get_quote_verification_collateral_with_params` was introduced in the SGX QPL.

> Changes are also needed in the OE SDK to call this new API.

Reviewer: The SGX plugin should be the thing calling this API correct?
```suggestion
Changes are also needed in the OE SDK's SGX plugin to call this new API.
```

Goals:

>  - Applications can call `oe_verify_evidence` and pass third party specific parameters to do customized verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Verifier applications can call `oe_verify_evidence` and pass third party specific parameters to do customized verification.
```

 - Changing the contract for the additional parameters does not need OE SDK changes.

> > The contract for the additional parameters are between OE SDK applications and the SGX third party cloud collateral caching services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contract for the additional parameters are between Verifier applications that use the OE SDK, and the SGX third party cloud collateral caching services.
```

User Experience
----

A new policy type `OE_POLICY_ENDORSEMENTS_BASELINE` is added to current policy types.

> Only one policy in this type can be specified for `oe_verify_evidence` API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only one policy of this type can be specified for `oe_verify_evidence` API.
```
grammar nit

The data for this policy is an opaque blob for OE SDK.

Specification
----

### New policy type

- `OE_POLICY_ENDORSEMENTS_BASELINE` in `oe_policy_type_t`
- The data for this policy is a blob.

### New APIs / OCalls

> Though there is no API signature changes for `oe_verify_evidence`, some internal APIs that potentially get used by tools need to be changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though there are no API signature changes for `oe_verify_evidence`, some internal APIs that potentially get used by tools need to be changed.
```
grammar nit

> For backward compatibility, the following internal APIs will be added to ensure all existing code can still work,

Reviewer: I don't follow. They're _internal_, so all existing code should be in this repo and can just be changed, no?  Or is the issue that we have not-internal APIs that need to be deprecated?

Attestation QPL Enforcement Support
====

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you break paragraphs in multi-lines so that it's easier to review?

> This proposal is to make a change to `oe_verify_evidence`, so that it can support policy based QPL (Quote Provider Library) enhancement, such as allowing the API user to pass data to QPL for more advanced quote verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal is to make a change to `oe_verify_evidence`, so that it can support policy based SGX QPL (Quote Provider Library) enhancement, such as allowing the API user to pass data to the SGX QPL for more advanced quote verification.
```

Reviewer 2: s/policy based/policy-based

Motivation
----

> Intel SGX rolls out PCK certificate and collateral information about every six month. There is a scenario that a quote is signed by the last version of PCK certificate cannot be verified with the latest version of collateral information. This causes unnecessary attestation failures when new versions of PCK certificate and collateral information are rolled out. To deal with this issue, the QPL need to be able to return any version collateral information based on additional query parameters (referred as baselines). With that, a new API called `sgx_ql_get_quote_verification_collateral_with_params` is introduced in QPL. Changes are also needed at OE SDK to call this new API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Intel SGX rolls out PCK certificate and collateral information about every six months. There is a scenario where a quote signed by the last version of PCK certificate cannot be verified with the latest version of collateral information. This causes unnecessary attestation failures when new versions of PCK certificate and collateral information are rolled out. To deal with this issue, the QPL need to be able to return any version of collateral information based on additional query parameters (referred to as "baselines"). With that, a new API called `sgx_ql_get_quote_verification_collateral_with_params` was introduced in QPL. Changes are needed in the OE SDK to call this new API.
```

Author: Thanks for this, really appreciate that!

Goals:

>  - Verifier can call `oe_verify_evidence` and pass QPL specific parameters to do more advanced quote verification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - Verifier can call `oe_verify_evidence` and pass QPL-specific parameters to do more advanced quote verification.
```

User Experience
----

> A new policy type `OE_POLICY_COLLATERAL_BASELINE` is added to current policy types. Quote verifier can pass multiple policies with this type, while OE SDK would pass all the policies down to the QPL API without interpreting the data content.

Reviewer: "Collateral" is not a standard term, not used at https://github.com/openenclave/openenclave/blob/master/docs/DesignDocs/AttestationApiRequirements.md or in the RATS architecture.  It seems to be an Intel SGX specific term, and SGX specific terms shouldn't be used in non-SGX-specific policy types.  If this is SGX specific, then SGX should be in the name like OE_SGX_POLICY_COLLATERAL_BASELINE.  If it's not sgx specific, then it should use a term from the RATS architecture.

Author: Good suggestion! let me update the name to be SGX specific,

> A new policy type `OE_POLICY_SGX_COLLATERAL_BASELINE` is added to current policy types. Quote verifier can pass multiple policies with this type, while OE SDK would pass all the policies down to the QPL API without interpreting the data content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new policy type `OE_POLICY_SGX_COLLATERAL_BASELINE` is added to current policy types. A quote verifier application can pass multiple policies with this type, while OE SDK would pass all the policies down to the QPL API without interpreting the data content.
```

Specification
----

### New policy type & its data structure

- `OE_POLICY_SGX_COLLATERAL_BASELINE` in `oe_policy_type_t`
- `oe_sgx_collateral_query_param`, which is defined as below,
```C
// defined by QPL
#define MAX_PARAM_STRING_SIZE (255)

> typedef struct _oe_sgx_collateral_query_param

Reviewer: This looks like a generic key/value pair struct.  Why is it specific to SGX collateral?
I'd propose removing "sgx_collateral" from the struct name and the policy type value.

Author: Good suggestion, we can reuse this for potential future usages, I have removed sgx_collateral in the name

{
uint8_t key[MAX_PARAM_STRING_SIZE+1];
uint8_t value[MAX_PARAM_STRING_SIZE+1];
} oe_collateral_query_param_t;
```

### New APIs / OCalls

> Though there is no API signature changes for `oe_verify_evidence`, some internal APIs that potentially get used by tools need to be changed. For backward compatibility, the following new APIs wil be added to ensure all existing code either build from OE SDK headers and libraries or source directly can still work,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though there is no API signature changes for `oe_verify_evidence`, some internal APIs that potentially get used by tools need to be changed. For backward compatibility, the following new APIs will be added to ensure all existing code either build from OE SDK headers and libraries or source directly can still work,
```

> Though there is no API signature changes for `oe_verify_evidence`, some internal APIs that potentially get used by tools need to be changed. For backward compatibility, the following new APIs will be added to ensure all existing code either build from OE SDK headers and libraries or source directly can still work,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though there is no API signature changes for `oe_verify_evidence`, some internal APIs that potentially get used by tools need to be changed. For backward compatibility, the following new APIs will be added to ensure all existing code can still work,
```
I couldn't parse the phrase I removed

> - `oe_get_sgx_endorsements_with_policies`, after change, this API will be called by existing `oe_get_sgx_endorsements` without any policy.

Reviewer: Why do we need an SGX specific OE API instead of a TEE-agnostic named API?  Part of the goal of the OE SDK is to provide TEE-agnostic APIs.

Author: According to current code structure, this (oe_get_sgx_endorsements) is an SGX specific API, however, this API get exposed in the header so that other tools and code can use it. This change is to update this API with policies, so just add suffix to it. Ideally, this should not get exposed, then the API name with SGX specific thing should be just fine as it's for SGX provider. Maybe we can remove this API exposure in next major version release? How do you think? @dthaler

Author: By the way, I added a statement that the new API will not get exposed to headers so that it will not be used directly by SDK users

- `oe_get_quote_verification_collateral_with_params_ocall`, the current API is `oe_get_quote_verification_collateral_ocall` is an API defined in sgx/attestation.edl, which could have been used by user enclaves, so need to bring this new API to work with existing API.

### Code example

With the new policy, the OE SDK client will be able to pass in multiple collateral baseline parameters as below,
```C
oe_sgx_collateral_query_param_t* baselines = (oe_sgx_collateral_query_param_t*)malloc(sizeof(oe_sgx_collateral_query_param_t) * 2);

> memcpy_s(baselines[0].key, MAX_PARAM_STRING_SIZE + 1, "key1", strlen("key1") + 1);

Reviewer: What are the legal keys?   I'm guessing "key1" is not a real key name.

Author: I have updated the code to two sample keys from MAA

memcpy_s(baselines[0].value, MAX_PARAM_STRING_SIZE + 1, "value1", strlen("value1") + 1);
memcpy_s(baselines[1].key, MAX_PARAM_STRING_SIZE + 1, "key2", strlen("key2") + 1);
memcpy_s(baselines[1].value, MAX_PARAM_STRING_SIZE + 1, "value2", strlen("value2") + 1);
oe_policy_t policies[2];
policies[0].type = OE_POLICY_SGX_COLLATERAL_BASELINE;
policies[0].policy = &baselines[0];
policies[0].policy_size = sizeof(oe_sgx_collateral_query_param_t);
policies[1].type = OE_POLICY_SGX_COLLATERAL_BASELINE;
policies[1].policy = &baselines[1];
policies[1].policy_size = sizeof(oe_sgx_collateral_query_param_t);

// Now, call oe_verify_evidence with policies
result = oe_verify_evidence(
            // The format ID is OE_FORMAT_UUID_LEGACY_REPORT_REMOTE for all OE
            // reports for remote attestation.
            &_uuid_legacy_report_remote,
            report,
            report_size,
            endorsements_buffer,
            endorsements_buffer_size,
            policies,

>             2,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            OE_COUNTOF(policies),
```

Attestation SGX QPL Enforcement Support
====

This proposal is to make a change to `oe_verify_evidence`, so that it can support policy-based SGX QPL (Quote Provider Library) specific enhancement, such as allowing the API user to pass data to the SGX QPL for more advanced quote verification.

Motivation
----

Intel SGX rolls out PCK certificate and collateral information about every six months.
There is a scenario where a quote signed by the last version of PCK certificate cannot be verified with the latest version of collateral information.
This causes unnecessary attestation failures when new versions of PCK certificate and collateral information are rolled out.

> To deal with this issue, the SGX QPL need to return any version of collateral information based on additional query parameters (referred to as "baselines").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deal with this issue, the SGX QPL needs to return any version of collateral information based on additional query parameters (referred to as "baselines").
```
grammar nit

Author: Thanks for this, I will read through it again, really appreciate this!

With that, a new API called `sgx_ql_get_quote_verification_collateral_with_params` was introduced in the SGX QPL.
Changes are also needed in the OE SDK to call this new API.

Goals:

>  - Verifier can call `oe_verify_evidence` and pass SGX QPL-specific parameters to do more advanced quote verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Verifier can call `oe_verify_evidence` and pass SGX QPL-specific parameters to do more advanced verification.
```

User Experience
----

A new policy type `OE_POLICY_SGX_COLLATERAL_BASELINE` is added to current policy types.
A quote verifier application can pass multiple policies with this type, while OE SDK would pass all the policies down to the SGX QPL API without interpreting the data content.

Specification
----

### New policy type & its data structure

> - `OE_POLICY_SGX_COLLATERAL_BASELINE` in `oe_policy_type_t`

Reviewer: Now that the type has a TEE-agnostic name (oe_query_param_t), could the policy type value also have a more TEE-agnostic name?
E.g., OE_POLICY_OPTIONS or something?

Author: I thought about that before, see the "Alternatives", the problem is OE SDK needs to know how to route the parameters, for generalized the oe_query_param_t, I would take it as OE_POLICY_SGX_COLLERAL_BASELINE data is oe_query_param_t, and in future, some other policies can share the same data type, because it's generic, it does not necessary to have a generic policy name for the generic data type, how do you think?

Reviewer: I totally get that there may be multiple policy types with the same struct, but can you say more about what you mean by "how to route the parameters"?  The format UUID in the oe_verify_evidence() call already tells OE that it's evidence to be routed to the SGX plugin to interpret.

Author: it's true that UUID points to a provider, however within the oe_verify_evidence call, we may need to call multiple APIs from provider to fulfill the request, now, the question is should we pass all the provider polices to all provider APIs without filtering? or in other words, will all provider APIs take same format of additional parameters?

Author: Oh, sorry, just realize that are you saying that the name of the policy does not need to have SGX in it?

Reviewer: Are you saying that the SGX plugin needs to call multiple "providers"?  (I'm not sure what a "provider" is).  I'm just saying that in your sample code, lines 69-71 identify to OE that it should be routed to the SGX plugin.   Lines 60 and 63 could have called it OE_POLICY_OPTIONS or whatever else that isn't SGX specific, and I think it would still be routed to the SGX plugin because of lines 69-71, right?  Let me know if I'm confused :)

Author: not multiple providers, but multiple APIs in same provider, that is possible, right? if we make the policy to be generic, then we need to enforce all APIs in the same provider to take same set of additional parameters.

Author: Reopen this as Dave may heave other questions. @dthaler , I would like to clarify what I referred multiple APIs in the same provider, today, oe_verify_evidence needs to call provider to complete the API call, I think we all agree on this. I assume we also agree on a provider may provide many APIs to OE SDK. Based on that, my point is for a given OE SDK API, it does not necessary to have an enforcement that this OE SDK API only can call one provider API behind the scenes. for example, oe_some_api may have the following logic,
- do validation
- do step 1
- call provider API1 to complete step 1
- do step 2
- call provider API2 to complete step 2
- return the result

In this case, if we pass a generic block of parameters for provider, then we need to pass that block of parameters to both API1 and API2 for the provider. Versus, have a more specific policy saying that these parameters are for API1 of the provider, then we don't need to pass the parameters to API2 at step2. 
let me know if that helps to resolve your confusing.

Author: According to 2/09/2022's meeting, since we have a consensus on this topic, I will close this discussion

- `oe_query_param`, which is defined as below,
```C
// defined by SGX QPL
#define MAX_PARAM_STRING_SIZE (255)
typedef struct _oe_query_param
{
uint8_t key[MAX_PARAM_STRING_SIZE+1];
uint8_t value[MAX_PARAM_STRING_SIZE+1];
} oe_query_param_t;
```

### New APIs / OCalls

Though there is no API signature changes for `oe_verify_evidence`, some internal APIs that potentially get used by tools need to be changed.

> For backward compatibility, the following new APIs will be added to ensure all existing code can still work,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For backward compatibility, the following internal APIs will be added to ensure all existing code can still work,
```

- `oe_get_sgx_endorsements_with_policies`, after change, this API will be called by existing `oe_get_sgx_endorsements` without any policy.
This new API will not be exposed to OE SDK users.
- `oe_get_quote_verification_collateral_with_params_ocall`, the current API is `oe_get_quote_verification_collateral_ocall` is an API defined in sgx/attestation.edl, which could have been used by user enclaves, so need to bring this new API to work with existing API.

### Code example

> With the new policy, the OE SDK client will be able to pass in multiple collateral baseline parameters as below,

Reviewer: Where should the OE SDK client get the list of legal key names/values from?  I.e., what list is "region" and "tcbevaluationdatanumber" on?   Can we link to a reference here?

Author: Good question, however, the answer is we don't have a list. It's specifically defined by SGX, and as of now, region, tcbevaluationdatanumber are the keys that I got from them. I would prefer the list to be maintained somewhere in SGX official document site, however, I can update this doc with the link when it's ready, but as of now, the official list is not yet ready.

Reviewer: Ok, I just think the API is not really usable without a referenceable list.

Author: that's true, let me put a placeholder here for future update

- `OE_POLICY_ENDORSEMENTS_BASELINE` in `oe_policy_type_t`
- The data for this policy is a blob.

### New OCall API

> Though there are no API signature change for `oe_verify_evidence`, one EDL based API need to be added,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though there are no API signature changes for `oe_verify_evidence`, one EDL based API needs to be added,
```
grammar nit

> - New OCall `oe_get_quote_verification_collateral_with_baseline_ocall` to be added to sgx/attestation.edl, which will coexist with current API `oe_get_quote_verification_collateral_ocall` for backward compatibility.

Reviewer: Is the EDL file published in the OE SDK headers?   If not, can we just change it?
If it is published in the OE SDK headers, then can that be un-done?   Shouldn't the EDL files be internal APIs?

Author: Yes, they are published with OE SDK headers, SDK applications can create their own edl and references to OE SDK edl files, that's why I treat it as public API (as long as OE applications can see it)

Reviewer: Ok then I think this is a larger issue (not blocking for this PR), that I will file a separate architectural issue for that we should address across OE.
